All right, so let's talk about
string concatenation in Java.
The most common method for manipulating strings
is the concatenation operator.
Now, the concatenation operator for a string in Java,
which I'm sure you're aware of, is the plus.
So, let's review a simple example.
I'm still in my Strings project from previous videos,
I'm creating a new class, StringConcat.
All right, so I'll run that.
And we can now concatenate a string.
So, what's happening here is that the plus operator
is overloaded for strings, such that if any element
is a string in the equation,
then it converts the other operand to a string
and produces a new string
by joining the two operands together.
That's one example of it.
What actually happens when you try
to concatenate a null object?
Well, let's have a look at some code for that.
So, here we've got a null object
and we're attempting to concatenate the null object
with another string,
so if you run this,
so you can see what's happened there, that,
in the case of a null object,
the result of doing that,
concatenating the two results will be the string value,
that you're concatenating as well as
the string text null concatenated together.
Which may not be what you thought would happen.
All right, so moving on now,
let's look at a primitive data type
and concatenating those with strings.
All right, so you can see
we've got a primitive int on line 22,
and we're trying to concatenate that with a string.
Let's run this.
And you can see the Java quad happily concatenates
a string to a primitive type.
Basically, we're creating a new string
as a result of doing that.
All right, so let's start talking about reference variables.
When you concatenate a string to a reference variable,
if the variable is a reference type,
then the toString() method on the object is called.
If the variable is a primitive data type,
the variable is boxed to a wrapper
and its toString() method is called.
And obviously, that's what's happened here,
when we tried to concatenate using primitive type.
But let's have a look at that example
using a reference variable.
We're gonna add a few examples to demonstrate this.
What we need is to create a very simple class.
We're gonna add that to the bottom of this file first.
And you can see that literally,
I just got a toString() method there.
And obviously it's non-public.
All right, so let's look at concatenating
this reference variable.
So I'm gonna add some code to do that in our main method.
And you can see that we're actually creating
a new version of our class, a new instance,
and we're trying to do some concatenation on it.
So, if you run this,
and you can see, quite happily
the toString() method was actually called
from our simple class,
and the concatenation for that and the other string
went through quite nicely by Java.
So, you can see that, in the last three examples
that I've actually shown,
even the case of using the primitive type,
we can use a primitive data type
with a concatenator operator,
and you don't need to specify a wrapper
because it happens automatically,
and in the second example,
the toString() method of the class was automatically called
when it concatenated the strings together.
So in that example that I'm talking about on line 24,
pretty simple example,
when we concatenated a string to an int.
What happens if you take that a step further
and we do some basic integer math first?
Let's put some code in.
So you can see now things are a little bit more complicated
with our concatenation, specifically on line 35.
So have a think about what you'd think
the result of that would be before you run the example.
Okay, I'll run it now.
And you can see, we've got resultString is 20
equals 1010.
Now, does the value in resultString surprise you here?
So, what's important here is that
operator overloading has precedence,
such that I plus J,
are evaluated as ints by the operator plus,
and the operator was addition, not concatenation
at the beginning of the statement
prior to the string equal operand,
which then overloads the operator
and begins the string concatenation process
so that operands after the initial string
are now evaluated as strings individually
as described in the operand type evaluation.
Now, I'll talk about operator precedence in a future video,
but it's important that you know
that if you want both equations to be evaluated
as integers prior to printing the results,
you'll need parentheses around the second equation
for that to happen.
So, let's actually put some more code in,
with parentheses, so you can see what I mean.
So, depending on what you want,
you need to understand the use of the plus sign
when combining it with strings and numbers
is really important there to get the results
that you're expecting.
So, if I now run this,
you can see by the use of parentheses,
we're actually getting the results
that we actually want in this scenario.
All right, so, let's move on.
A slight variation on the concatenation operator
is the compound concatenation operator
and that's the plus equals, as opposed to the plus.
So, let's create a new class to look at some examples.
So I'm gonna create a new class called StringCompoundConcat.
And you can see, at various points in this code
we're using the plus equals compound concatenation operator
instead of the concatenator operator
that we've used previously.
Now, if we run this.
And we get the results,
which probably aren't surprising for you at this time.
Now, let's go a little bit further here.
We're gonna add some more code to the main method
and run it.
And specifically, we're gonna do a string concatenation
when the right hand object isn't a string.
So let's just look at doing that.
All right, so, let's run this.
Now here, were you surprised that you could
concatenate a string to an object that you created,
and even more surprising, perhaps,
that referencing the toString() on your object
after this concatenation
continues to display the concatenated value?
Maybe it'll be surprising for some people.
All right, so, let's now look at primitive data types
used with this operator, combined with string objects.
And we've got both a valid and an invalid
piece of code there to talk about.
So, just, in the case of the error
which I've got down here,
required int, found a string.
Errors come up when the primitive data type
is on the left hand side of the operator.
Now, note that this includes
the Boolean primitive data type as well.
This might happen if you reverse
and put it onto the right hand side.
All right, so I'm just gonna remove,
well actually, I'll just comment out those two lines.
All right, so just finishing off now.
Let's just look at another two quick examples.
I'm going to do,
paste some code in to include some math
on the right hand side.
So I'll add that code in.
All right, so there's the code.
So note that the first section that I've added at the top
does the integer math first.
So let's actually see what the output would be
from running this.
So I can see what the results are
in the output pane down at the bottom.
So, I've covered a lot of different examples in this video
with the string concatenation operator,
and the compound concatenation operator as well.
In the next video, we're gonna start
looking at methods on the string object
that we can use to manipulate string objects.
See you in the next video.